Nick died tragically early in January 2015. He was 22 years of age. Nick was part of the usual less than perfect family; with brothers, cousins, aunts, uncles, grandparents, friends and various others who loved and confused him with equal measure. As a child Nick was diagnosed as having ADHD and later this was clarified as Asperger's syndrome.

This meant that Nick's experience of the world was more confusing than for most of us, as the analytical stream of his brain and the emotional stream were less interconnected. He was to experience learning difficulties, his parents' divorce, his mother dying much too soon, having to take what work might be offered and various tribulations of life.

My son Nick had a powerful memory. Before he started school he could name each of the Thomas-The-Tank-Engines: James, Gordon, Annie and Clarabel, Percy, Toby, Henry and many others. As an adolescent Nick mastered catching after back-flipping at trapeze, having no fear of heights. He had abundant patience, which he drew on when working as a personal care attendant. Nick enjoyed drawing, as did his grandfather and great-grandfather who shared a family curse of depression; Japanese anime was his preferred style. Nick could be maddening to live with; he might tidy up but not completely, staying up late and expressing decided opinions.  

Only a few months before his death, Nick sought medical advice. He took the prescription medication he was prescribed. He accepted a referral to a clinical psychologist and did not miss any appointments. We cannot know what was in Nick's mind on the evening he died and why he so hastened into this good night. His family has earnestly reflected on how we might have better supported Nick. Nick is buried with his mother.
I have two black dogs. Sometimes I only have one. But once I see him, I know the other one will shortly follow. I dont always have the black dogs with me. Some days I feel completely weightless, like Im not carrying a burden. Im so used to the black dogs being around. I feel guilty not having them. I worry if they are not with me they are with someone else. But when they are there I want them to leave. I wish they would die and never return. But they can not be killed.

The black dogs names are depression and anxiety. You never know when they are going to come back to their master. Although I am their master I have no control over them. They are constantly barking. Confusing me. I cant think with them barking so loudly. The shame of owning these black dogs is real. You feel like they are a sign of weakness. You dont want anyone knowing you have these black dogs. Especially dogs you cant control. When you see friends, you put the music on loud, so they cant hear the black dogs. You pull the curtain so they cant see the black dogs. Youre so busy worrying about people seeing the black dogs, so worried the black dogs will escape and bite someone that you give up trying. You isolate yourself, wanting to be alone with them.

The dogs soon take over everything in your life. They take up all your time.  People who come over, you push away because you dont want them to see the real side of you, the pain and shame you are feeling. If people see the dogs get defensive. You reassure people that that they are OK and I have them trained and under control. But you (alone) can never get control over them.  

All the things you used to enjoy are now pointless. The dogs distract you and ruin everything surrounding you. You dont want anyone to be affect by you having the dogs. This is why you hide. When you finally admit to yourself that you need to get a trainer to help train the black dogs, they leave. You think the worst is over. They wont come back.  But (for me) they always come back. They can come back at any time and who knows, the dogs maybe bigger and more viscous next time.

Some days I just want to end it all, I have tried once, but luckily it was unsuccessful. I just want to have a day without the black dogs, or a day when I can fully control them. I am glad I am now getting help, because everyday it is getting better, and I am beginning to see a light at the end of the tunnel.
I have been affected by depression and anxiety for around twenty years. That was when I suffered a total mental breakdown and lost everything I had including my wife, my children, my business and my mind. I ended up in a caravan park where I was living on the gutters edge.  I would hide inside the van for most of the day being too afraid to go outside in case I had to talk to people. My brain simply stopped working. I couldnt even get it together to make a cup of cup of coffee let alone make a meal.  It was so bad I hated waking up in the morning and often wished that I hadnt.  

I constantly had emotions of anxiety, fear, guilt, sadness and terror welling up from inside of me. It was the gut wrenching feeling from my stomach and ache in my heart I dreaded the most. Many times I thought about committing suicide and tried to figure out ways to do it.  On a day when it was really bad, I was seriously considering it when the phone rang and the voice simply said, How are your going?  Terrible I replied  and Im sure the person could hear the despair in my voice.  Where are you? he said  Stay there, dont go anywhere else.  

About ten minutes later, there was a knock on the caravan door. I went to open it and there was a stranger standing there. Can I come in? was all he said. That man simply talked to me about his life and what had happened for him. He told me how it took a long time to overcome his problem step-by-step and having faith and the belief that he would some day become well. I could see the similarities in my life and began to accept myself as being one of the many people that suffers from a mental condition. The stranger inspired me in two ways. Firstly, that if he could re-build his life it was proof that I could also get my life back together again. Secondly and more important, was that this man valued me sufficiently enough for him to leave work and come to see me.

This meant I must have been of some value to another person and I didnt have the right to end my life. And it doesnt stop there. People suffering from mental conditions need support and encouragement to keep working on themselves. Ive been using pressure points on myself to make the feelings of depression go away within a few minutes and I no longer have thoughts of suicide.

The Father I Knew

And the guy I wish I had known longer

The Summer of 1993 saw me driving down the freeway with my Dad, listening to MeatLoafs Bat Out Of Hell. Loud. Listen to the motorbikes, mate, they have those live on stage when he performs. The idea that someone would allow motorbikes to be ridden around on a concert stage seemed ridiculous to me even then, but if anyone would do it, I was sure it would be MeatLoaf.

We were on the highway on our way to Mini Golf. It was my first time playing, and I took to it with a particular vigour that continues to this day. That vigour is a mixture of excitement, frustration and a particular lack of hand-eye coordination. Dad would coach me, always patiently. It wasnt until his funeral that I discovered my sporting skills were directly inherited from him.

I refer to those days as the MeatLoaf days, as that was the soundtrack to my relationship with him. I now know that he loved Dire Straits, but back then it was MeatLoaf. We listened to that album each time we got in the car. We would go to the beach, where he taught me how to bodyboard; we would go to the movies, where he showed me my first M15+ rated movie when I was five (Waterworld, the Kevin Costner classic); we would go the aforementioned Mini Golf; every Saturday, I knew that I would see him from 11am-4pm, without fail.

The day he showed me Terminator II and RoboCop, I fell in love with Action films. The days we spent playing Indy500 (always needing to enter the corresponding answer from the booklet to the question on the load screen piracy has come quite a way). Our adventures side-by-side waging war through the levels of Doom, Wolfenstein and Commander Keen, two mates loving each others company.

Mum and Dad had split up when I was six months old, making it difficult for me to remember a lot of time growing up with him. I saw him from the bus once, on my way to primary school. I banged and banged and banged on the window calling out to him, but he couldnt hear me. I was devastated.

He spoke about his family often, being one of five, the middle child and the only boy. He would update me on what they and their families were up to, who was pregnant and how my cousins were.

I was lucky at primary school. I was looked after each school day by friends mother (some would call it babysat). She was a kind and gentle person, teaching me how to tie my shoelaces and the wondrous power of the aloe vera plant on burns. She was also a single mother looking after her only son. I think because of this, it never really dawned on me that what Mum and I had experienced was that strange. By this time, Mum had married my stepdad, my sister had been born, and we were a family unit. I still saw Dad every Saturday from 11am-4pm though, and I looked forward to it all week.

Its difficult to define the relationship that I had with Dad, now that it has been so many years. He taught me how to play cricket  oddly, I am left handed for batting, but right handed for bowling, writing, playing tennis he didnt even blink, he just said that I should go with whatever felt was the most comfortable and whatever gave me the most control. We watched the cricket together in his lounge room, the sea breeze always coming in through the open double doors, while we looked north along the coast. Life could not be better.

Each year he wrote to Santa and specifically had him visit us two nights before Christmas. He really was a great Dad.
Unfortunately, he fell from his second floor balcony in 1994. Seeing him in hospital sucked. His trademark moustache was now accompanied by three-day stubble. He was always very precise with his appearance; lying there he didnt resemble himself at all.
He was the light of any room, telling his stories with a smile and and a chuckle. The neck brace didnt let him do that. What the doctors diagnosed was filtered down to me through Mum and my stepdad. Hes had a bad fall, his brain has moved, and as a result his personality may have changed. He will always love you though.

Im not sure thats entirely what happened (and I have heard varying recollections/interpretations of that day), however I do know that he left the hospital with a little less light in his eyes.

All of a sudden we were moving. Dad came to visit a few times, which was great, but our Saturdays were no more. It was too far and too hard to see him often.

Hes moods grew darker, our interactions tinged with the kind of pressure an 8 year old cant understand, let alone respond to.

Fathers Day 1988 was the last time I spoke with him. We had gone out for breakfast with my stepdad. Unfortunately, Dad had to be at a coal mine for work by lunchtime and it was a four-hour drive from his house. By the time I called, he had left.

When the phone rang that evening, I knew it would be him. I raced to the phone and answered it, expecting to hear his familiar voice and smile down the line. But it wasnt. It was angry. And loud. He shouted so much. I had to pass the phone to Mum, speechless. What just happened? In turn Mum, equally wordless, passed the phone to my stepdad. She hugged me and told me she loved me.

Once the phone had been placed back on the hook, there was a lot of confusion, anger, numbness.

As I didnt see another phone call working, I wrote a letter by hand (read: 8 year old scrawl). I told him that I loved him, that I was sorry I hadnt called him in time on Fathers Day, but that neither my Mum nor I would not be spoken to that way. I sent it. It was the stupidest letter I have, or will ever, send.

My Dad committed suicide three years later, on the 25th October, 2001. He was incredibly proud, he was the life of the party and he meant the world to so many people. But he didnt know how to ask for help, and he didnt know how to accept help.

I have been lucky enough to inherit a lot of Dads gifts. But the most important lesson I have learnt from him is:

Never be too proud to reach out and ask for a hand. It will change your life.
I have always been a worrier. I can look back on my childhood now at the age of 24, and recognise the signs of anxiety developing.

My stressful ways developed into anxiety around four years ago. I wasnt lucky enough to have kept any close friends from my schooling days, and went into a reckless phase after high school, developing friendships with people who I was better off away from.

When I decided it was time to leave this phase, and all the people involved in it behind, I was left virtually friendless.

I put all my physical energy into working full time (which meant having two jobs), whilst completing my full time university degree. This meant working seven days a week, and completing university assignments after finishing 12 hour shifts.

You may ask why I put myself through this, well I had a lust to travel, as well as an incredible partner who I couldnt bare seeing the world without. So I took on the financial burden of paying for him to come with me on these holidays, as he wasnt in the position to pay for himself.

When I meet people one of the first things they mention to me is the number of overseas holidays my partner and I have been on. Yes, we have been especially fortunate to travel around the world, but what most people dont understand is that travel was my escape. It gave me something to look forward to, and something to get me through the long days of being miserable in my life. When I was on a plane and it took off, this meant I could escape the life I hated so much for a short period of time.

In order to work these extreme hours I gave up every aspect of my social life and wellbeing. This meant I had a very small group of people I interacted with, none of whom were females my own age. I ate terribly and never exercised, resulting in weight gain, as I was simply too exhausted to cook or go to the gym after work. Every cent of my wage went into paying for two people to go on numerous overseas holidays, so I was never able to indulge in anything in my day to day life.

This pattern kept up for well over two years, from which I developed horrific social anxiety.

My experience of dealing with social anxiety is a feeling of overwhelming fear when interacting with individuals I wasnt comfortable with. I was unable to look people in the eye when speaking to them, and struggled to keep a conversation going. I came off as both extremely quiet and shy, as well as rude, which anyone who knows me well knows I am the opposite of.

During this period of my life my self-confidence was at an all-time low, and I felt disgusted every time I looked in the mirror. I stayed away from people as much as I could, and felt I made an embarrassment of myself whenever I went out in public. I constantly had a voice in my head saying Why would anyone want to be friends with you? You are ugly and pathetic.

Things turned around when my partner finished his apprenticeship, and was lucky enough to get a well-paying job. This meant for the first time in our relationship I no longer held the financial burden. For the first time in over three years I was able to spend money on things which seem so trivial but play a huge role in our self-confidence, such as getting my hair done and buying some new clothes. I also cut back on my ridiculous work schedule.

Im happy to say now that a year on things have improved tremendously.

Would I say my life is perfect and I am happy every day? No. But do I still have that feeling that I am dying on the inside? Not in the slightest.

I did small things, which made such a huge change to my life. Such as joining a netball team, regularly going to the gym, and pushing myself to interact socially whenever I was given the opportunity. I still struggle in social situations, but nowhere near to the extent in which I did. Most importantly, I have a partner who has stayed by my side, through all the anxiety attacks and sleepless crying nights, whilst loving me unconditionally, when I was an extremely hard person to love.

I recently started a job which I thought was going to be the beginning of my career. However, things are not always perfect and I realised this job was causing my anxiety to reappear. I was going back down the path to the dark place I had been for so long. I can say that for the first time in my life I put my mental health first and quit this job. It took me too long to crawl out of that pitch black, horrific place and I do not intend to ever return.

I understand my story may be nothing compared to what some people face, but if even one person relates it was worth writing.

So if you are out there, I promise things will get better. Just keep pushing on, one day at a time. 